Add instructions on installing Istio for vms (#7248)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/setup/install/virtual-machine/index.md

---
title: Installing Istio for virtual machine connectivity
description: Install an Istio mesh such that a virtual machine can connect to it and configure the virtual machine.

> weight: 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight: 40
```

Author: thanks @ericvn I have addressed this comment.

keywords:
- kubernetes
- virtual-machine
- gateways
- vms
---

Follow this guide to install an Istio control plane
[multicluster deployment](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) and connect your first virtual machine.

{{< warning >}}
This guide relies heavily on the
[stable plugin ca certificate](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/) feature. Istio
does not offer an industry standard recommendation for certificate management. Please consult your
information security team when using any plugin certificate.  The determination of your company
policies for certificate management is the choice of your company.
{{< /warning >}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< tip >}}
This workflow is tested and validated. The Istio authors feel this workflow is suitable for experimentation but not production. Like all alpha features, this workflow is subject to change.
This is a useful tip from an expert
{{< /tip >}}

```

Reviewer: I think moving the banner text to the top of the page (so it only shows on this page) is a better idea, and then remove the banner.

Author: thanks @ericvn I have addressed the comment.

Cheers,
-steve

---
title: Installing Istio for virtual machine connectivity
description: Install an Istio mesh such that a virtual machine can connect to it and configure the virtual machine.
weight: 40
keywords:
- kubernetes
- virtual-machine
- gateways
- vms
---

Follow this guide to install an Istio control plane

> [multicluster deployment](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) and connect your first virtual machine.

Reviewer 2: Why does this say mulicluster? If we only do the steps in the following section in only one cluster, it will be a single cluster deployment.

Author: The link describes the multiple clusters deployment model. Hence the reference. I can change this if you like.

Author: Given this is resolved by your excellent reword, I have clicked resolve.

> Follow this guide to install an Istio control plane
> [multicluster deployment](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) and connect your first virtual machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow this guide to deploy a [multicluster service mesh](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) spanning one more more clusters and then connect a virtual machine to it.
```

Author: thanks @frankbu for the suggestion. I have applied it unmodified in my local tree and will submit a new commit.

but not production. Like all alpha features, this workflow is subject to change.
{{< /tip >}}

## Prerequisites

1. [Download the Istio release](/docs/setup/getting-started/#download)
1. Perform any necessary [platform-specific setup](/docs/setup/platform-setup/)
1. Check the requirements [for Pods and Services](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/)
1. Virtual machines must have IP connectivity to the ingress gateway in the connecting mesh, and optionally every pod in the mesh via L3 networking if enhanced performance is desired.

## Installing the Istio control plane

1. Set the name of your cluster as an environment variable.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ CLUSTER_NAME="<the name of your cluster>"
    {{< /text >}}

1. Set the name of your desired namespace as an environment variable.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ SERVICE_NAMESPACE="<the name of your service namespace>"
    {{< /text >}}

1. Create a working directory for files generated in this install guide.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ mkdir -p "${HOME}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"
    $ mkdir -p "${HOME}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/"${SERVICE_NAMESPACE}"
    {{< /text >}}

> 1. Execute the following commands on each cluster in the mesh where a virtual

Reviewer 2: Execute only the commands in step 4 on each cluster? Should this `Execute the following commands on each cluster in the mesh` sentence go to the of the section? It applies to the whole set of instructions, doesn't it?

Author: This is poorly worded. I will reword to `Execute the following commands on the cluster in the mesh where the virtual machine connection should be ...`

Reviewer 2: Sure, but you also need to change the CLUSTER_NAME and SERVICE_NAMESPACE variables and mk more dirs for each cluster, so you need to do step 1-3 again on each cluster too.

Author: This guide doesn't address adding more than one virtual machine to a service mesh. This is represented by the `SERVICE_NAMESPACE` variable. This guide doesn't address adding multiple clusters - the @rcaballeromx guide covers this process.

Do you have any suggestions to fix these shortcomings?

Cheers
-steve

Reviewer 2: Oh, so maybe I'm confused? But, these instructions don't seem to hang together. How many clusters are we installing Istio on ... now it sound like just 1. If so, then the first sentence of the doc should not say anything about multicluster, this is just a single cluster mesh configuration. In step 1 of this section it refers to "your cluster", I'm assuming that is the one and only cluster we're installing Istio on. If so, then what other cluster are you referring to in the "Execute the following command on the cluster in the mesh ...". There is only one == <your cluster> from step 1, right?

Am I missing something here?

Author: Istio is installed in one cluster and one cluster only.

I will work to rectify the language around this first problem.

Cheers
-steve

    [Determining the ingress host and ports](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/#determining-the-ingress-ip-and-ports) to set the environment variable `${INGRESS_HOST}`.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ sudo echo "${INGRESS_HOST} istiod.istio-system.svc" >> /etc/hosts
    {{< /text >}}

    {{< idea >}}
    A sophisticated option involves configuring DNS within the virtual
    machine to reference an external DNS server. This option is beyond
    the scope of this document.
    {{< /idea >}}

1. Install `root-cert.pem`, `key.pem` and `cert-chain.pem` within the directory `/etc/certs/`.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ sudo mkdir -p /etc/certs
    $ sudo cp {root-cert.pem,cert-chain.pem,key.pem} /etc/certs
    {{< /text >}}

1. Install `cluster.env` within `/var/lib/istio/envoy/`.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ sudo cp cluster.env /var/lib/istio/envoy
    {{< /text >}}

1. Transfer ownership of the files in `/etc/certs/` and `/var/lib/istio/envoy/` to the Istio proxy.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ sudo chown -R istio-proxy /etc/certs /var/lib/istio/envoy
    {{< /text >}}

1. Start Istio within the virtual machine.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ sudo systemctl start istio

>     {{< /text >}}

Reviewer 2: You need a cleanup section after this.

Author: thanks @frankbu . I have added one.

---
title: Installing Istio for virtual machine connectivity
description: Install an Istio mesh such that a virtual machine can connect to it and configure the virtual machine.
weight: 40
keywords:
- kubernetes
- virtual-machine
- gateways
- vms
---

> Follow this guide to deploy a [multicluster service mesh](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) spanning one more more clusters and then connect a virtual machine to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow this guide to deploy a [multicluster service mesh](/docs/ops/deployment/deployment-models/#multiple-clusters) spanning one or more clusters and then connect a virtual machine to it.
```

Author: applied. Thanks for the catch!

policies for certificate management is the choice of your company.
{{< /warning >}}

{{< tip >}}
This guide is tested and validated. The Istio authors feel this guide is suitable for experimentation
but not production. Like all alpha features, this guide is subject to change.
{{< /tip >}}

## Prerequisites

1. [Download the Istio release](/docs/setup/getting-started/#download)
1. Perform any necessary [platform-specific setup](/docs/setup/platform-setup/)
1. Check the requirements [for Pods and Services](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/)
1. Virtual machines must have IP connectivity to the ingress gateway in the connecting mesh, and optionally every pod in the mesh via L3 networking if enhanced performance is desired.

## Installing the Istio control plane

1. Set the name of your cluster as an environment variable.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ CLUSTER_NAME="<the name of your cluster>"
    {{< /text >}}

1. Set the name of your desired namespace as an environment variable.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ SERVICE_NAMESPACE="<the name of your service namespace>"
    {{< /text >}}

1. Create a working directory for files generated in this install guide.

    {{< text bash >}}

>     $ mkdir -p "${HOME}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"

Reviewer: No reason to create both directories if using the -p. Just use the second line.

Author: good optimization - thanks.

---
title: Virtual Machine Installation
description: Deploy istio and connect a virtual machine to it.
weight: 40
keywords:
- kubernetes
- virtual-machine
- gateways
- vms
---

Follow this guide to deploy Istio and connect a virtual machine to it.

{{< warning >}}

> This guide relies heavily on the

Reviewer 3: I think we can rephrase this a bit. This guide has a requirement that the user is using a plugin root CA and has configured Citadel as an intermediate CA.

Basically I'm trying to make sure we're clear to the reader what the requirements are on the Istio install:
1. Setup the control plane with plugin root CA and an intermediate cert
2. Turn on mesh expansion

I think it is fine to explain how to do those as part of the guide but we want to make it easier for the user to understand how things fit together.

Also the linked-to-task needs to be updated to use the Makefile instead of samples (hopefully already being addressed).

Author: Agree.

I have changed the install flow slightly and added the words "install or upgrade".

I changed the warning as follows:
```
This guide has a requirement that the user is using a [plugin root CA](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/)
and has configured Istio as an intermediate CA.        
```

Only real change from your suggestion is instead of Citadel, using the word Istio. as component names ideally should not be used in documentation.

[stable plugin ca certificate](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/) feature. Istio

> does not offer an industry standard recommendation for certificate management. Please consult your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
does not offer a recommendation for certificate management. Please consult your
```

Author: resolved.

information security team when using any plugin certificate. The determination of your company
policies for certificate management is the choice of your company.
{{< /warning >}}

{{< tip >}}
This guide is tested and validated. The Istio authors feel this guide is suitable for experimentation
but not production. Like all alpha features, this guide is subject to change.
{{< /tip >}}

## Prerequisites

1. [Download the Istio release](/docs/setup/getting-started/#download)
1. Perform any necessary [platform-specific setup](/docs/setup/platform-setup/)
1. Check the requirements [for Pods and Services](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/)
1. Virtual machines must have IP connectivity to the ingress gateway in the connecting mesh, and optionally every pod in the mesh via L3 networking if enhanced performance is desired.

## Prepare the guide environment

1. Set the environment variables `"${ISTIO_DIR}"`, `"${WORK_DIR}"`, your cluster

>     name, and the service namespace. Ensure `"${WORK_DIR}"` is prefixed with `"${WORK_DIR}"`
>     (e.g. `WORK_DIR="${WORK_DIR}"/vmintegration`).

Reviewer 2: The `Ensure ...` part doesn't seem necessary, or even make sense. Why should I need to set WORK_DIR twice? I suggest deleting.
```suggestion
    name, and the service namespace.
```

Author: great catch Frank. Problem Addressed.

Cheers
-steve

Author: fwiw, the reason the recommendation is there, is all commands are based upon absolute paths.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ ISTIO_DIR="<the directory containing an unarchived version of Istio>"
    $ CLUSTER_NAME="<the name of your cluster>"
    $ SERVICE_NAMESPACE="<the name of your service namespace>"
    $ WORK_DIR="<a certificate working directory>"
    {{< /text >}}

1. Create the `"${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/"${SERVICE_NAMESPACE}"` working directories.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ mkdir -p "${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/${SERVICE_NAMESPACE}"
    {{< /text >}}

## Install the Istio control plane

> 1. Execute the following commands to create certificates and install them in your

Reviewer 3: I'd like to explain to the user rather than just tell them to run a command, can we reword to explain what this is doing? This command does a LOT of work and it isn't obvious what parts the user can choose not to do.

Author: This is a hard to describe because much magic is done in the makefile. @myidpt can you offer appropriate wording here?

    cluster for use by Istio. See
    [Certificate Authority (CA) certificates](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/)

>     for more details on configuring an external CA. The `NAME` variable is

Reviewer 3: I would drop this thing about NAME variable being unimportant, just say it is used to uniquely identify clusters.

Author: resolved.

    unimportant, although this is used during certificate generation to
    uniquely identify clusters. The `NAMESPACE` variable identifies the
    namespace where the virtual machine connectivity is hosted.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd "${WORK_DIR}"
    $ make -f "${ISTIO_DIR}"/samples/certs/Makefile NAME="${CLUSTER_NAME}" NAMESPACE="${SERVICE_NAMESPACE}" "${CLUSTER_NAME}"-certs-wl
    $ kubectl create namespace istio-system
    $ kubectl create secret generic cacerts -n istio-system \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/ca-cert.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/ca-key.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/root-cert.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/cert-chain.pem
    {{< /text >}}

> 1. Install Istio with virtual machine integration features enabled.

Reviewer 3: Can we say install or update Istio with virtual machine integration enabled?

I want to make sure readers know this doesn't require a fresh cluster, just turn on mesh expansion.

Author: Yes I have reworked this in a couple different ways let me know if you agree.

    cluster for use by Istio. See
    [Certificate Authority (CA) certificates](/docs/tasks/security/cert-management/plugin-ca-cert/)
    for more details on configuring an external CA. The `NAME` variable is
    used during certificate generation to uniquely identify clusters. The
    `NAMESPACE` variable identifies the namespace where the virtual machine
    connectivity is hosted.

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ cd "${WORK_DIR}"
    $ make -f "${ISTIO_DIR}"/samples/certs/Makefile NAME="${CLUSTER_NAME}" NAMESPACE="${SERVICE_NAMESPACE}" "${CLUSTER_NAME}"-certs-wl
    $ kubectl create namespace istio-system
    $ kubectl create secret generic cacerts -n istio-system \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/ca-cert.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/ca-key.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/root-cert.pem \
        --from-file="${WORK_DIR}"/"${CLUSTER_NAME}"/cert-chain.pem
    {{< /text >}}

## Install the Istio control plane

If the Istio control plane is not already installed, or isn't installed with `.spec.values.global.meshExpansion.enabled=true`, you

> must enable.

Reviewer 3: must enable what?

Here's a potential rewording of this:

The Istio control plane must be installed with virtual machine integration enabled (values.global.meshExpansion.enabled: true).

Here is an example IstioOperator spec that can be used to install the default control plane and configure virtual machine integration.

<example spec>

You can install this control plane spec using:

<istioctl install>

See <link to install docs> for more details on installing Istio using istioctl.

Author: thanks. I addressed most of these comments, although a I did the work in multiple instructions blocks rather than just one. Take a look and let me know if it looks suitable.

## Create certificates for use with the virtual machine and Istio control plane

{{< tip >}}
This `Makefile` is limited to creating one virtual machine certificate per cluster. The Istio authors

> expects operators to read and understand this guide to formulate their own plans for creating and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expect operators to read and understand this guide to formulate their own plans for creating and
```
